Welcome to the final day of WWDC.
So, kicking the graphics track off
this morning with Session 211,
which is Introduction to Quartz Services.
And the primary focus of this session
is going to be the non-drawing APIs that
are part of the Quartz architecture.
These APIs do things
like manage the displays,
even facilitate doing certain common
operations that developers need to do,
such as what we call screen scraping,
or pulling pixels back
out of the framebuffer.
And the key thing is that the important
part of the session is that these
APIs that we're going to be talking
about in the session are essentially
the APIs that lie underneath other
APIs to do display management
that you might be familiar with,
like some QuickTime APIs,
DrawSprocket APIs,
and Display Manager APIs.
And one of the reasons we put this
session together is because we
really want developers to migrate
to the Display Services APIs,
because that's really where
all the work actually happens.
And you're getting closer to
the native API and getting more
functionality in doing it that way.
So,
it's my pleasure to invite Mike Paquette,
Graphics and Imaging Engineer,
to the stage to take you
through the presentation.
Good morning!
I'm Mike Paquette.
I'm the person in the Quartz
team who takes care of all the
non-drawing parts of Quartz.
I'm the guy working way down
there in the bowels of the system,
fixing the plumbing,
wrapping in a little duct tape here
and there as your requests come in,
implementing all those
nice features you need.
And I'll be going over Quartz Services.
Quartz Services.
What can Quartz Services do for you?
We're the non-drawing part of Quartz.
Yeah,
there's code that doesn't draw in there.
That's a lot, but eh.
We handle all the
display management stuff.
We give you the functionality you need to
take over a display to do a presentation.
We let you reconfigure the displays.
We can let you position
displays on your desktop.
We can let you adjust the
resolution of the displays,
change the refresh rate,
do all those fun little tweaks.
The Display Preferences panel is an
example of someone who uses our services.
We also handle some
special purpose tasks.
We give you the basics you need to
read the framebuffer contents off,
that screen scraping thing.
We also have support for doing
remote control of the computer.
programs like Apple Remote Desktop and
Timbuk2 can take advantage of this stuff.
Now,
most apps don't need Quartz Services,
this low-level stuff.
Most apps will run just fine and don't
even need to know this stuff exists.
Where does this fit in in Quartz?
We're the display management code.
We're your screen scraping support,
and we're event injection.
Event injection's a fancy way of saying,
take an event and stick it into
the event chain and let it dribble
on down to all the applications.
We're going to give you full-screen
application support information here
and display configuration information,
and we'll go over a few of the more
obscure APIs that are in there.
Some just help you out with backward
compatibility and some to help you do
some neat things that you might not
have been able to do very easily before.
We're also going to cover the
Remote Operation Services.
That's the screen scraping part.
I've got some sample code for you.
We'll walk you through a little
bit of tricks and techniques there
and show you how to post some
events for remote control purposes.
And also give you guys who are writing
user-based device drivers some tips
on how to make that work right.
Now, we've got some definitions.
We use some funny terms
in Quartz sometimes.
Display ID.
Well, it's probably something
that identifies a display,
huh?
You figured that much out.
Okay, display IDs are numbers
that go along with displays.
They're 32-bit-ish kind of things.
There's a typedef in there for them.
The numbers stay the same for any
specific exact hardware configuration,
even across reboots.
Any changes in the
hardware configuration,
you unplug a display and replace
it with a different model,
you move the display to a different
connector on the back of the machine,
you're going to get a
different display ID.
Now, all these displays that
we hook up to the machine,
you'll query in Quartz
Services using that display ID.
That's how you identify them to Quartz,
and that's how Quartz tells
you about the displays.
Display States.
We have a bunch of different
states monitors can be in.
A bunch of states the
framebuffers can be in.
We combine all that together and just
refer to this as a display state.
States include active,
and active display is
one you can draw on.
That's pretty straightforward.
It's there and it's nice and drawable.
We can have displays that go to sleep.
You're familiar with that.
It goes blank.
One of the energy star modes
usually kicks in on a monitor.
It gets all nice and quiet.
Don't draw on asleep displays.
Now, again,
if you're an ordinary application,
you don't need to worry about that.
It's all covered for you.
The only time you really need to be
concerned about these is if you're
writing something that's drawing directly
to the screen itself through one of our
fancy APIs we're going to get into here.
Mirroring.
Oh, mirroring has changed
so much over the years.
We've introduced things
like hardware mirroring,
and we've got software mirroring.
We have hardware-generated display maps
and all sorts of other wacky things.
I'll be getting into all those
different states in detail and giving
you some tips on how to deal with that.
We have online displays.
An online display is pretty much a
monitor plugged into the computer.
It may be awake or asleep,
it may be mirrored or unmirrored,
but it's connected.
Offline?
Well, that's the connector on the back of
your computer with no monitor there.
It's just offline, all alone,
a placeholder in the system.
Don't try to talk to the
system about offline monitors.
They aren't there.
You'll see all through our
programming interfaces this CG prefix.
CG is, of course,
as is intuitively obvious
to the most casual observer,
the prefix for Quartz.
Now,
the Display Services part of the system
is going to cover display enumeration,
It's going to tell you that is,
what are all the displays?
Give me a list, please.
It's going to cover
display configuration.
Place this display here,
change this one's resolution,
change the refresh rate,
change the bit depth.
We're going to cover
Palette Display Support.
Now there's something you
haven't heard about in a while.
Palettes.
It's so 70s.
And we've got some new
goodies for Panther,
our Display Fade API.
Competitive technologies.
By competitive, I don't mean that, oh,
it's something those people
up north are building.
What I mean is other technologies inside
Mac OS X that do a lot of the same
functions that you see in this code.
There's the Sprockets stuff.
Draw Sprockets has a lot of
display management goodies in it.
QuickTime has a few obscure APIs in
the corners for handling displays,
as does the AGL,
Apple Graphics Library package.
And of course, there's our old buddy,
Display Manager.
Now, these APIs are present in Mac OS X.
Why are they in Mac OS X?
Oh, so you could bring your apps
forward to assist you in porting.
They're there so that those CFM,
PEF-based apps,
that you want to run on 9 and 10 can run.
You can use CG Direct Display,
these new APIs, instead.
Those older functions on
Mac OS X are all built on top
of the CG Direct Display APIs.
So you don't really need to put
up with those things if they
don't do exactly what you want.
If you cut right down the
CG Direct Display APIs,
you can get some finer
control over the system.
You might be able to make
it do just what you want.
I'll give you some
tips on how to do that.
Clients of these display services: Games!
We like games.
Full-screen applications, like Keynote.
Configuration Tools, Display Preferences,
your own apps.
New functionality that we have.
Mirroring.
I told you about mirroring before, right?
Software mirroring is something that
pretty much everyone is used to.
We all remember writing
in those good old loops.
Run through the G device list.
Find those displays.
Figure out which ones intersect
our window and draw on all of
them over and over and over again.
Well, you know,
you don't actually have to do
that in a Carbon or Cocoa app.
That's covered for you.
The Quartz Compositor does that work.
But if you are talking directly
to the displays yourselves,
you still get to do that,
which might be one good reason to think
about sticking with Windows systems and
not bothering to go right to the display.
Something to keep in mind.
If we're doing software mirroring,
software mirroring will happen
on all these machines with
different graphics cards,
monitor on each graphics card,
or if displays are in different depths,
Software mirroring you have to go
through if you are talking right to the
display and draw on each display in turn,
going down the line.
Hardware mirroring is something that's
shown up just in the past few years.
Hardware mirroring happens when
all those displays are running
at the same depth and they're
attached to the same controller.
You'll see hardware mirroring
when you connect up external
monitors to the newer iBooks,
to the shiny PowerBooks,
to those funny new graphics
cards that support two monitors.
Hardware mirroring.
One display is the active display,
the primary display.
Keyword.
The other displays are
mirrored in hardware.
You don't need to draw on those.
So you just draw on the
active or the primary display
in a hardware mirrored set.
We have more programming interfaces to
tell you which ones are the primary,
which ones are active,
and which ones are hardware mirrors.
We also had hot plugging in the system.
I'm going to get into that in some
more detail in a little while.
Hot plugging turns mirroring on and
off automatically in some cases.
In other cases,
you get extended desktops.
In either case,
if you're going to do full-screen access
using what we call display capture,
you need to worry about all these things.
Display capture is something really cool.
It lets you steal the display
away from the Windows system.
It's yours.
You got it.
You have lots of control that way.
But, you know what?
The Windows system doesn't know about it.
So anything that normally goes into
a window isn't going to work there.
Like views, HI views, NS views, controls,
buttons,
all those fancy high-level widgets.
They don't work on capture displays
because you can't put a window on that.
You've just taken over that
hardware for your own purposes.
Now, when you do take over
the hardware like that,
though, there are advantages.
OpenGL, for example,
can put that display into some
very unusual modes of operation
that are extremely fast.
Game developers have probably
noticed this already,
huh?
So you've got more control,
but less high-level functionality.
In particular, because you're not going
through the Windows system,
you don't have that view hierarchy
and all those other goodies there.
All those accessibility APIs that
are going to be covered in
another session today don't work.
So that's something to bear in mind.
Captured displays are
normally used by games.
That's a big use of them,
particularly OpenGL games.
You like to take over the display
and go as fast as you can.
There's another way to
do full-screen access,
and this will be familiar to lots of
folks coming from the Mac OS 9 world,
Carbon developers, Hide Menu.
If you call Carbon's Hide Menu function,
the menu bar disappears,
the dock goes off the screen,
it looks big and empty,
you then create a full-screen
window and put it up there,
and you draw through a window.
Now, your app is still running
in the Windows system.
This is used by some
other presentation apps,
such as PowerPoint,
to do its full-screen thing.
It's also used by a number of games.
This is the way a lot of the games that
are based on the PEF CFM technology that
run on both Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X work,
because this sort of functionality
is available on both.
You are going through the
Windows system to do this.
You're doing a full-screen window.
That has advantages for
accessibility purposes.
It has disadvantages in that
it might not be as fast as,
for example,
running OpenGL in a full-screen mode.
Display Capture.
We've got functions for you.
CG Capture Display.
Grab one display.
Take control.
The display is removed
from the Windows system.
The app that calls this is
forced to the foreground.
You wouldn't believe how bad it is
to leave somebody taking over an
entire display in the background
so the events go to some other app.
It's really hard to recover
from that situation.
So if you capture a display,
we're going to make sure
you're the foreground app.
You'll be pulled to the foreground.
It's your responsibility then
to process events and respond.
Once you've captured a display,
you can draw directly
to that screen using GL,
Quartz, or other techniques.
You can get a port to it.
[Transcript missing]
If you've captured the displays,
you release them to go
bring up some UI elements,
you can do that,
and then you capture them again,
it will apply the last captured
mode to the displays again,
so you'll be right back in
the last mode of operation
you were running full-screen.
After you're done using a display,
you might want to release it.
You can do this in the middle of
your program just so that you can
go ahead and use those UI elements,
bring up some control panels
for setting up game options,
that sort of thing.
CG Display Release releases one display,
lets it back into the Windows system.
CG Release All Displays is really handy.
This releases all the displays.
Okay, that was obvious.
It also restores all the display
modes to the ones the user last
set up in their preferences.
It puts the gamma tables back the
way color sync thinks they should be.
And you can use it after a display
capture or a capture all displays.
One function, boom,
puts everything back the way it was.
You don't have to keep notes yourself
of what the display layout used to be.
You don't have to go through, "Oh,
let's see.
I think this one was over here.
I think this one might have been
up here." None of that stuff.
Just call one function, boom.
You're all set.
drawing to a capture display.
We have a couple of new functions,
new for Panther.
CG Display Get Drawing Context.
This gets you a Quartz
drawing context for a display.
The context is owned by the framework.
Notice it doesn't say create there,
so don't release it.
OpenGL.
You can use OpenGL.
Pick a pixel format.
Set up a full-screen GL context,
those CG GL APIs.
When you're done, destroy your context,
put everything back the way it was.
OpenGL is usually going to give you
the best overall graphics performance.
If you've been going to any of
the GL sessions you've seen,
you can use it to do 2D animations,
you can use it to blit
images to the screen,
you can use it to do all sorts
of interesting special effects.
GL is pretty cool stuff.
And even better,
you can now get a CG context
from your OpenGL context to
get an accelerated context.
That's been covered in
a few sessions here,
too.
Some people might need to change
their display configuration.
If you're playing a game and, oh,
you're on one of those
nice big cinema displays,
well, you probably didn't do all
your artwork for that 1280x900
or whatever that thing is.
You probably did a lot of artwork for,
oh, 640x480.
So you've got two choices.
You can do a little bitty square
in the middle of the display,
or you can change the display
mode and fill the screen.
The Display Configuration
API lets you do this.
It's a transactional model.
You tell the system,
I want to begin a display configuration.
I want to accumulate a
series of operations.
I want to set a display mode.
I want to set a position.
I want to set a refresh rate.
All these goodies.
And then,
once you've accumulated this new state
that you want all the displays in,
you apply it with one function call,
and the system will then go through
and do whatever's needed to get there.
Now,
the system has constraints built into it.
We don't let you put gaps
between your displays.
You can lose your mouse cursor that way.
We don't allow overlapping
displays that can look kind of odd,
be very confusing to a user.
We don't allow you to make
up your own display modes.
You go, "Oh, let's see,
42's a good number.
"I'll use that one.
"I wonder what that does." No,
you can't do that.
The system's going to
reject these sort of things.
If you're on, for instance,
an iBook that's doing
mirroring of displays,
The hardware doesn't handle
not mirroring the displays,
so if you try to do that,
the system's going to say, no, no,
I don't do that.
And you can't un-mirror.
So.
We have these constraints
that get applied.
One other constraint that gets
applied is it's going to look at
all the displays you're setting.
The one that shows up at 00 for its
origin point becomes the main display.
That's the one that gets the
menu bar and the login window.
If you don't set any displays to 00,
we get to pick one.
So we'll just do it ourselves.
CG-begin display configuration is how
you get the whole process rolling.
This is going to return to you a
CG display config ref in a pointer.
This little ref thing is what
you're going to pass to all the
other configuration functions.
It's going to be the accumulator for
all the state you want to build up,
and it's going to be what you
use to apply the state change.
You're going to call CG-complete
display configuration to complete
the display configuration,
or if you've done all
this work and decided,
that's a hassle,
I don't want to do this anymore,
you can throw it away with
cancel display configuration.
To set the display origin,
you use the mysteriously named
function CGConfigureDisplayOrigin.
This sets the origin point,
the upper left corner of that display.
You can move them in X,
you can move them in Y.
Not in Z.
and his team are working on a new
application called Display Mode.
CodeWise looks like a CFDictionaryRef.
A display mode describes a
particular display resolution,
a particular refresh rate,
a particular bit depth, and some options.
Display modes come from a couple
of different APIs that we have.
We have APIs that will let you
is the Chief Executive Officer of
the CgConfigure Display Mode.
He's been working on the
development of the CgConfigure
Display Mode for a long time.
He's been working on the
development of the CgConfigure
Display Mode for a long time.
He's been working on the
development of the CgConfigure
Display Mode for a long time.
He's been working on the
development of the CgConfigure
Display Mode for a long time.
You can also use our little chooser.
CD Display Best Mode for
Parameters and a set of related
functions with really long names,
longer than that even,
can be used to pick a mode.
These are sets of functions
which take a desired width,
height, pixel depth, refresh rate,
and some other options
that you can feed in.
[Transcript missing]
They also have some options
that let you specify,
"I want only modes that are known
safe for this monitor and graphics
card." So you don't have to bother
putting up that confirmation panel.
That can be handy.
There are options to pick
stretched modes to fill in gaps
on the sides of your monitor.
You can turn on mirroring.
Now,
some interesting things that happen here.
When you mirror a display
and another display,
the system is going to do
some interesting things.
It's going to try for hardware mirroring.
So if you're not explicitly setting
the mode of some displays that
you're putting into a mirror set,
the system is going to auto-configure
those to match in resolution and to
match in depth so that it can use
that hardware mirroring I mentioned.
So if you don't explicitly
set the mode of a display,
we will try to match them all up
to avoid those matting borders.
What's a matting border?
You might have seen these.
We get these nifty widescreen gadgets.
[Transcript missing]
So when you go to set
up displays as a mirror,
the system is going to try and change the
modes of some of the displays in the set
to match the smallest display in the set,
to match the depth of
the displays together,
so we can use our
hardware mirroring tricks.
Now, unmirroring,
some displays cannot be unmirrored.
For example, the iBooks,
that secondary display
port is only for mirroring,
so you really can't break them apart.
The hardware doesn't handle that.
One other thing, if you look in the
display mode dictionary,
you might see numbers in there for
things like the display row bytes.
That's sort of a value
taken in isolation.
When you mirror displays together,
the robot's values for the individual
modes may change because the device
driver and the hardware might
require certain amounts of padding.
If we do matte generation,
we may do that matte
generation in hardware.
So the only,
the video portion that's live
is the only piece of framebuffer
memory that actually exists.
Those black bands are just an
artifact of the video system.
They don't actually
exist in the framebuffer.
So things like row bytes may
change after display configuration
where you set mirroring setup.
Once you've set up your display modes,
your display positions,
you've got your mirroring
set up the way you want it,
you then call CGComplete
Display Configuration.
That takes that ref,
pulls all the data in,
grinds on it for a while,
applies some of the system constraints,
and applies it.
It then releases that configuration ref.
There's a couple of different options.
Well, there's three different options,
actually, this takes.
Configure for app only.
This is a really handy little mechanism.
If you tell the system,
I want this configuration
just to apply to my app,
what that tells the system is,
this is not a permanent configuration.
This program wants it.
It might be a presentation app like this.
It might be a game.
It wants it in its
particular display mode.
If something bad happens,
and that game ceases to
function for some reason,
say it fails, quits, escapes, dies,
blows up, poof,
The system says, oh, well,
that was a mode only for that app.
I better go back to
the user's preferences.
And it restores everything for you.
So, if you're just setting things
up for your own app's purposes,
please use the Configure
for App Only option.
That gives us this auto
recovery mechanism.
One of the other cool things
is if you tell the system this
configuration is for an app only,
if you need to get back
to the user's preferences,
say, at the end of the game,
you can use CG restore
permanent display configuration.
And that's a long one.
That'll put things
back the way they were.
That restores the permanent
display configuration.
Caught you by surprise, didn't it?
Now, configure for session
is kind of interesting.
This applies a configuration change
that lasts while that user's logged in,
but
[Transcript missing]
and configure permanently it.
Anyone?
Bueller?
It configures it permanently!
writes it in Display Preferences and
it comes back the next time the user
logs in or the machine is rebooted.
Interesting tidbit for you:
if you're an administrative user,
and you do a configure permanently.
That also becomes the boot
configuration for the machine.
The configuration is adjusted by
the system after you feed it in.
So, you should,
after setting the configuration,
I really do.
Did you get what you expected?
Did it do some tweaks on
you that you didn't realize?
We actually have functions in
the system that you can use to
read back the configuration.
You can read back the
origin point for a display.
You can read back its width and height.
You can read back all sorts
of interesting things.
You can get the current display
mode out of the system and see,
"Oh, is this the mode I access for?
That's pretty close."
In addition, we also have some other
APIs you might find handy.
You can ask for Displays Vendor
[Transcript missing]
You can ask for the display resolution.
That's the width and height.
You can get the origin point.
One interesting thing is,
CG display uses OpenGL acceleration.
That's our little way of saying,
you got Quartz Extreme.
CG Display I/O Service Port.
Yeah, what is that?
That's an I/O Service Port.
Yeah, right.
An I/O Service Port is a
little representation that
you can pass into I/O Kit.
I/O Kit can then look at that and say,
"Oh yeah,
This display, and you can read back
all sorts of interesting,
really low-level things from I/O Kit,
things like EDIT data.
And everyone's eye just glazed over.
Next slide.
We have display change
notifications you can subscribe to.
Now, quick draw.
pays attention to these.
It does its own thing and reconfigures.
Quikter also has the
implementation for Display Manager,
by the way.
Many of you might be calling
Display Manager to get display
configuration state changes.
That works.
Guess what it's built on?
It's Friday morning, isn't it?
It's built on this stuff.
CG Display Register Reconfiguration
Callback.
That you can pass a function into,
it registers it, and it calls you back
when something happens.
In fact, it calls you back when
something's about to happen.
Is that cool or what?
We know in advance,
something's going to happen.
The callback is invoked for each display.
We'll call it back with this display,
with that display,
with the other display, one at a time,
with a flag telling you,
"Something's about to happen."
And then, after something happens,
displays are reconfigured,
it gets called again for each display.
This display, its origin changed.
This display, its mode changed.
This display,
it's a mirror of this display.
And this display was
removed from the system.
What?
We support hot plugging of displays now.
Yeah, you got that ADC or DVI connector
on the back of a PowerBook?
You plug a display in that?
You don't have to close the lid.
You don't have to put
that thing to sleep first.
We noticed that, oh, look,
something changed in the hardware.
Quick, reorganize the system.
We reorganize the system,
we bring up the new display states,
and you're good.
And this you have to be prepared for.
Those darn users can just take
that connector and pull it right
out while your machine's running.
Displays can vanish on you.
Boy, if that doesn't mess up a game.
So you have to be aware that these
state changes can happen at any time.
It can be really shocking for you.
We do have some cool tricks, by the way.
If you've captured displays,
if you captured the display,
Hot plugging and unplugging isn't
going to perturb your system that much.
You capture the display you're running
on the built-in display in a PowerBook.
Somebody plugs in another display,
disconnects it.
will note that, oh look,
something's connected.
We have to change state.
After he's done,
after he's let that display go,
we'll change state.
So we hold off for a little while.
That keeps your game code
from exploding on you.
It's a good thing.
Now, when somebody actually hot plugs
that monitor into a system,
fun stuff happens.
I/O Kit gets pinged by
the hardware saying,
"Hey, look, something changed."
The device drivers go rattling along,
"Oh, this one!
Hey, look, there's a monitor on it now.
I had one before."
and the hardware and the
software will work together to
pull the monitor and find out,
oh, what kind of monitor are you?
Okay, we're one of these, huh?
And you run in watch display modes?
Okay, I'll just pick one.
And it fires up the monitor and
puts it into some mode of operation.
Usually a mode of operation that's marked
as a default state for that monitor.
At this point,
we send notifications out to
all the applications saying,
"Oh, look, something changed.
"You've got a new monitor."
and your application can do something
with that or just ignore it.
Most apps will just ignore it.
It's not a big deal.
If you're a Carbon or Cocoa app,
you don't care.
It's no big deal.
If you're some kind of
full-screen presentation app,
you might be interested in this.
You might be able to do something
special with that extra display.
Ah, the one that's going to get you,
though, is when they unplug the display.
What if you were doing something on that,
too?
What if you thought you had it captured,
but you didn't?
If you actually capture the
display and it gets unplugged,
Well, that's not so good.
If you're capturing displays,
you might want to think about
keeping your UI on a display that's
marked as the built-in display.
And yeah, there's API that tells you,
CG is display built-in.
True.
Okay.
So you can check for that.
The old way of fading a display
was grab the gamma table,
stuff some values in, okay,
that's pretty good, take those values up,
put some slightly smaller values in,
okay, keep doing that over
and over and over again,
hundreds and hundreds of times,
burning up CPU cycles until you
finally fade the screen out to black
or whatever you were going to fade to.
Well, that has a couple of bad effects.
First, you burn a lot of CPU cycles.
And let's face it,
monitors have refresh periods.
They aren't going to see that
change but 70 or 80 times a second.
You can do it thousands
of times a second.
It doesn't help.
It's CPU intensive.
You lose your color sync data.
Yeah,
those color sync guys went to a lot of
trouble to calibrate those displays,
and now look what you've done.
So, we have a new API, new for Panther!
Boy, I can't wake him up at all.
The Display Fade APIs lets
you tell the system,
"I want to do a fade operation now.
Please reserve the hardware and do a nice
smooth transition." It's driven off the
hardware and off of some fancy timers.
It does a really nice job of
fading displays in and out for you
to handle all those transitions.
You can use this instead of doing
the Gamma Table tricks on your own.
Very easy to use.
Built-in.
Now, we already have a fade effect
built-in for display mode changes.
Yeah, we do.
Yeah.
Haven't you seen that fade
to blue thing that happens?
That's the fade transition.
0.3 seconds fade out, 0.5 fade in.
You can override it when you're
doing a configuration for that
configuration operation only by
calling CGConfigureDisplayFadeEffect.
This wonderful function takes
the config ref that you're using,
the time to fade out,
the time to fade back in,
and the color to use
for the fade transition.
The default that's built into the
system will fade to that lovely shade of
French blue when you do a display change.
[Transcript missing]
Now, there's other places where
people like to do phase.
If you're in a game,
you've been running some sort
of cinematic piece and you want
to do a transition over to,
say, your GL-based animations.
Often people will do a fade out,
perhaps a hardware mode change,
bring up their full-screen context,
and do a fade in.
We can automate all this for you.
You can acquire the hardware
to do the fade operation by
calling acquire fade reservation.
When you're done, you can release the
display fade reservation.
The reservation is good
for up to 15 seconds.
If it takes longer than 15
seconds to your fade transition,
I'd think about that.
That's a long time.
Users get impatient.
Now, you can do the fade
synchronously or asynchronously.
You can tell the system,
"I want to do a fade.
I want to start with a normal display.
I want to end up with a solid color,
and I want the color to have
this RGB value." This is just
in the display color space.
0, 0, 0 would happen to be black.
and True.
Yes, I want this to be a
synchronous operation.
You'll call this, and two seconds later,
this call will return,
and the display will
then fade into black.
Very straightforward.
You can then do some setup operations.
For instance, stop your cinematic,
start your GL sequence running.
You might want to fade back in
while you're already rendering.
In that case,
you want to start the fade in and then
go right to doing your animations.
Let the fade proceed on its own,
not worry about it.
To do that, you'd start off with,
for instance, we're starting from a
solid color in this case.
We want to end up with the
display looking normal.
The starting color was black,
so we're doing a fade in from black.
False, meaning asynchronous.
In this case,
CG display fade returns immediately.
The fade occurs over
the next two seconds,
which is what we specified.
While you get your
GL animations up and running,
so you do a nice fade in,
your game figures are
already running around,
busily stabbing each other.
Just having a grand old time.
This can actually look pretty slick.
And this is easier than trying to do a
lot of the async callback stuff yourself.
All the actual callback and work
to drive this is handled outside
of your process in the fade
machinery we've added to the system.
Palette of Displays, whoa.
Here we go.
Who here uses Palette of Displays
in their new app they're coding up?
Good.
So I got some news for you.
This stuff's in the
system for legacy support.
There's minimal to no hardware
acceleration available when
you're using 8-bit palettes.
All that fancy hardware
just loves 32-bit mode.
It goes fast then.
You go down to 8-bit mode and it's,
"What?
I've got these huge honking buses and
you want me to move 8 bits at a time?"
It's got a low precision.
It doesn't composite very well at all.
It's barely supported by the hardware.
Come on, guys!
We're past the 70s.
We're past the 80s even.
We can get better.
The configuration functions will
let you select an 8-bit mode.
They won't let you make
it a permanent setting.
There is a reason for that.
"Anyone?
No?
All right.
We do have palette functions
for you to play with.
This is for legacy support, by the way.
I don't know if I mentioned that."
You can create a palette.
You can create a palette
from the display's contents.
You can create a palette with
an array of samples you provide.
You can get the color at an index.
You can set the color at an index.
You can tell a display,
"Here's your palette."
And you can release a palette.
Any questions?
No good.
Common developer issues.
What sort of issues could developers
possibly have with this stuff?
Well, there's recognizing those mirroring
and display configuration changes.
If you're playing with
the display directly,
You need to be aware of mirroring.
That old device loop
comes back to haunt you.
You're going to need to look at all the
displays in the mirroring set and make
sure you draw on all of them in turn.
is the Director of the Center for
Data and Information Technology at
the University of
Most of the newer hardware will
be doing hardware mirroring.
That's what you're going to get
in all the nice shiny PowerBooks,
in the newer iBooks, the white iBooks.
That's what you're going to get
with those funny cards that have two
monitor connectors on a single card.
Those will normally do hard remembering
unless you work really hard to make
it not do it by setting the displays
to different depths explicitly.
Don't do that.
Unless you really like to work at things.
If you're capturing displays,
you must be aware of the mirroring
state to get the correct behavior.
Capturing displays and changing
the display configuration.
Some people have been capturing the
displays just so they could change
the modes and then releasing them.
That looks funny.
The entire screen goes black
for a couple of seconds.
Your app comes to the foreground
even though you thought you were
doing this from some faceless
UI element in the background.
Looks bad.
Don't do that.
Please.
There is no need to capture the
display in order to reconfigure them.
Use CG Capture All Displays to
avoid funny desktop layout effects.
If you capture all the displays,
there's no desktop showing.
And we won't bother telling
things on the desktop that,
"Oh, yeah, the display's changed size.
Quick,
cram all your icons into one corner."
We can stop that behavior.
We can do it, people.
We can work together.
Capture all the displays.
Please.
That hides display mode changes
from the rest of the system.
Only your app needs to worry
about them in that case.
Display Changing.
Let's take a look over on Demo Machine 1
and see what this is all about.
I mentioned we had some APIs that let
us actually look at the display state.
[Transcript missing]
New for Panther!
We have a new function that
returns you the display width
and height in millimeters.
No, this is not actually 310 millimeters.
This one here is.
This number here is the display
ID for this particular display.
I mentioned you can get information
about particular models.
This is vendor ID 610.
I wonder who that could be.
And product ID 9215.
[Transcript missing]
- Fuck yeah, there is a mode for 640,
480.
How about if I go for, say, a... Oh,
that's close.
800 by 600 is the nearest mode
that would enclose that size.
1024 by 768 is the nearest mode
that would enclose this size.
Oh, look, we can get to 8-bit.
Let's see what happens if we apply it.
[Transcript missing]
Now, some displays have stretched
modes they can support.
Suppose I ask for 800 by 600 on this one.
Yep, this display's nearest
stretched mode is 10/24/7/68,
so it would take that and
try to stretch things.
Safe Modes.
Ah, we have a safe mode.
This is all the modes that are known
to function for this hardware and
the graphics card that's in here.
is the director of the Office of
Software Engineering at
the University of Michigan.
To get the information about a display,
we needed to get a display ID.
Let's get the main
display ID in this case.
We can feed in things.
This returns us the physical bounds
in millimeters for the display.
This returns us the pixel bounds.
For that display,
we can ask for the current mode.
That returns us that CFDictionaryRef,
and we can pull information out of that.
Anything in a CFDictionaryRef is
accessed by key.
In this case, the values that you'll get
back will all be CFNumberRef.
and you can use that to fetch out the
value as an integer or as a double,
whatever's most convenient for you.
The CFNumberRef will do the right
things as far as converting those.
Other APIs to let you get the vendor ID,
the model number,
very straightforward stuff.
Searching for a display mode,
this is a rough one.
[Transcript missing]
It takes a display ID, a desired width,
a desired height, depth,
a desired refresh rate,
An optional property value,
you can just feed in null
for the property by default,
or if you're looking
for only safe displays,
so you don't have to put up any
kind of confirmation dialogue,
you can feed in,
KCG Display Mode is safe for hardware.
And it returns you a mode.
The function will always return a mode.
If it can't figure out what
on earth you're asking for,
it'll hand back the current
display mode and say,
"I don't know.
Use this.
It works right now."
tries for a depth-first match on those.
Now, when we change the configuration,
I told you this is rough stuff.
We found a mode with
that best mode for stuff.
Begin configuration,
we get back our configuration handle,
configure the display mode for
the main display to that mode.
These modes are only valid for the
display you queried them on and
you don't get to make up your own.
The mode will only work if it's
returned by one of the APIs that
vends modes or lists of modes.
And once we've got things set up,
all we're doing is changing the mode.
In this case, we call
CG Complete Display Configuration.
Configure for app only,
so if something bad happens
and the app crashes,
we get back.
Capturing all the displays.
We have a new for Panther item.
You can specify an option,
capture with no fill.
That actually captures the display but
leaves the contents as you see them.
You can do your fade transition.
It looks like you're fading
out from the desktop,
really slick, and go into your app.
I'm going to show you an
example of capturing a display,
doing a fade-out, we're going to draw a
color bar's pattern,
and then we'll do that
asynchronous fade-back in.
One of the interesting things,
by the way,
is you can start a fade-back in and
release your reservation token if the
fade-back in ends with a normal display.
If it ends with a normal display state,
then releasing that token will have
no effect on the display's appearance.
The system will automatically say, "Okay,
this is a deferred release.
I'll release it once this fade-in
is done." And once we're done,
we're going to use Release All Displays
to release the displays.
Let's capture the display.
You'll see we're going to capture it,
but not actually fill it.
And we'll do a fade out.
Fade back in with our color bar pattern.
It's all captured.
It's ours now.
We can do with it as we wish.
Now let's click.
We restored everything.
That easy.
didn't have to record all
the display locations,
didn't have to try and put
them all back ourselves.
Very straightforward.
This sample code will be
appearing on our website soon,
here in the next few weeks.
Welcome to something
completely different,
Remote Operations.
Remote Operations is all the
stuff you need to do remote
control over the machine.
Display Drawing Activity Monitor and
Generation and Hosting of Events.
What could that mean?
Display Drawing Activity Monitor lets you
listen for state changes on the display.
Oh, look,
a window just flushed over here.
Oh, look, Quick Draw Movie's playing
over in that corner.
Stuff's happening.
It tells you the areas that
have changed on the display.
We'll also let you post events into
the system for remote control purposes
or for user space device drivers.
Now, how's all this going to work?
Why do you have to scrape
the bits off the screen?
Why can't I go get them somewhere else?
Well,
all the apps in the system are drawing
into their own private buffers.
You don't get to play with those.
They're the app's buffers,
not your buffers.
The buffers all go into
the Quartz compositor,
which takes all the bits,
blends them together,
seasons them lightly,
and sends them to the
framebuffer for display.
Some bits can be transparent.
Some of the bits in the framebuffer
may be the result of several
windows accumulated together.
The only place where you can get a
consistent picture of what all the
pieces look like is at the framebuffer.
There's a lot of processing that
can happen between here and there.
If you've looked at some of
the accessibility interfaces,
we have things like
Display Zoom that can actually occur.
So what you see on the display
doesn't actually correlate very
closely with what you started with
in the individual app buffers.
The final framebuffer product,
if that's what you need,
you pretty much have to go to that.
The Remote Operation Services is the
best way of getting these finished bits.
Clients of remote services
include Apple Remote Desktop,
Timbuk2, good old VNC,
Some accessibility applications
like to play with this too.
They may need to post
events into the system.
So they'll be using the event posting
interface to post into a particular
session and tell the apps in that
session to show certain behaviors.
Screen scraping.
All I get is bits.
Well, we have this complicated pipeline.
It's really hard to get to the
individual bits from the window.
If you wanted to get the bits on
the screen but not go to the screen,
eh.
[Transcript missing]
So to assist you in finding
what's changed on the screen,
we give you a system of
asynchronous notifications.
Async means that we tell
you something has changed,
your app goes and picks it up
and gets the current state of
what's changed on the system.
It's async so that applications
that don't behave well don't
get to hang the entire system.
It's very straightforward.
If you have delays in your processing,
delays that occur,
system-wide scheduling or load that
cause you to be a little slow about
getting the current state back,
that's not a big problem.
We keep coalescing the
state changes for you.
They're built up,
and your app will get the latest image
of whatever state's on the display.
There are new functions
added to Panther that tell
you not about just changes,
but about areas that are
moving on the screen.
This will help speed up certain
operations that you might get into
if you're doing screencasting.
: Oh, good morning.
Now, screen scraping performance.
Now,
that screen is at the end of a long bus,
that long pipeline.
It's out there at the distant end
of an AGP or PCI bus connector.
And if you go out there and
read those pixels yourself,
it's going to be slow.
The fastest way to read the pixels
off the screen is not obvious at all.
You use OpenGL.
You build a full-screen GL context,
select the screen with GL Read Buffer,
GL Front.
You read the screen with
GL Read Pixels into your own buffer.
That's going to get you DMA transfers
from the screen right into
your application's buffer,
if you do it right.
If you don't do it so right,
it's still going to get
you a fast software path,
but it won't be as fast
as doing the DMA trick.
Things to be aware of.
GL is a little different view of the
world than you might be used to if
you're used to dealing with framebuffers.
It puts things in quadrant one,
the origin point being down
in the lower left corner.
It's upside down.
Now, if you're just processing the bits
to pack them up and send them across
for a screencasting application,
that's not actually that big a deal.
It just means you have to walk through
the bitmap in a different order.
Set your pointers up correctly and set
up your stride as you traverse the data,
and you'll be all set.
Source code showing you how to
do this is going to be online.
I'm going to show you right now what
this looks like over here on DEMO 1.
A little bitty grab application.
We can grab the screen contents
and go ahead and save it to a file.
There we are.
And look, it's a screen grab.
Wow, that was exciting, wasn't it?
He can go back to sleep now.
I hooked up something interesting
to this version of Grab.
We can time it.
We'll do 10 Grabs in a row and average
it out and see how many milliseconds it
takes to go ahead and scrape this 10,
24, 7, 68, 32-bit screen in software.
Okay.
140 milliseconds.
That's not too bad.
Let's try it with OpenGL.
It got faster, didn't it?
That's more time for your application
to get the data compressed,
shove it over the wire,
and catch the next screen update.
I buy a factor of 10 in this case.
Now, you won't always see
that big of a change,
but on pretty much any of the hardware
we've built in the last couple of years,
this is faster than doing it in software.
DMA, good.
So, how did this code do it?
It's rough.
We set up...
For our main display, a mask bit.
We say we'd like a full-screen
context for that display.
We choose a pixel format.
[Transcript missing]
Set that context to be
the current context.
Tell the system, "This is full screen.
Here we go."
Point GL at the front buffer,
that is the display.
Ask it for the width and height.
Get a place to put the
data we're going to grab.
makes sure that all the
GL commands are finished and the
display is correct and current.
Tell the system we'd
like the data packed,
please.
Call GL Read Pixels with the
mystical incantation GL BGRA.
GL unsigned int dash 8888 rev.
These are Apple extensions.
They're present on all Mac OS X systems.
So I didn't bother
checking for that first.
Naughty me.
If you ask for this pattern,
this will match 32-bit
deep display hardware.
You'll get the DMA effect.
GL unsigned int 1555 rev,
the only other rev depth in there,
will get you the 16-bit display format,
and you'll get DMA transfers
in that case also.
When you're all done, release the stuff.
That's all there is to it.
Less than two pages of code in really
big type to capture the screen contents.
And back to the slides, please.
Over in the event side of systems,
you need to post events into the works,
right?
This is interesting.
We have keyboard and
mouse events coming in
from the kernel,
or to the kernel from our hardware.
The kernel and HID system
pick up those events,
Chew on them a little bit,
put them into a nice format for us.
Pass those into the Quartz Compositor.
What?
The Quartz Compositor knows
where all your windows live.
It knows which app is foreground,
so it can be used to route these
events out to all your applications.
There's a couple of ways to
push events into the system.
IOHitPostEvent is a call from
user space into the I/O Kit that
takes an event structure and
shoves it right in as though it
were coming from other hardware.
If you are writing a user space
device driver or something that wants
to pretend to be a device driver
synthesizing events system-wide,
use IOHitPostEvent.
There are also some techniques
that can be used to inject events
at the Quartz compositor level.
These are actually not appropriate
for user space device drivers.
They are used in some
assistive technology,
though.
These let you post a keyboard event in,
a scroll wheel event,
or a mouse event in at the
Quartz compositor level.
Now, why are these not appropriate?
We have multiple user
sessions on the machine now.
There can be a second user login
with a second set of Windows,
a second Windows system,
second set of apps, a second dock,
all that.
Post Keyboard Event,
Post Scroll Wheel Event,
and Post Mouse Event are going to post
into the session they are called in.
So if you're emulating hardware,
you missed.
The difference there?
I don't want anyone to
get tripped up on this.
Posting mouse events is
pretty straightforward.
CGPost mouse event,
you give it a cursor position,
you tell it a Boolean that tells it,
"I want to move the
cursor to this position."
Normally you'd pass the true in.
You pass in a count of buttons, one, two,
three, and a set of Booleans
for the button state.
If you push a button down,
don't forget to post another
event to let the button up.
Thank you.
That has a really bad effect on the
system I'm going to get to in a minute.
There's also an interface,
CG Warp Cursor,
you can use just to move the
cursor around on the display.
Posting keyboard events.
There are key codes,
which are the decrypted glyph
codes that you see in a system.
There are also character, I'm sorry,
there are key codes.
Boy, is this terminology fuzzy.
Key codes are virtual key codes.
They're scan codes
coming off the keyboard.
Character codes are the encoding
for a particular character or glyph.
The thing you need to get right
passing into this call is the key code.
Most environments ignore
the character code part.
The virtual key code is the
part you need to pass in.
There's actually a dummy
flag you can pass in.
For the character code,
it'll cause the system to guess at
the best key code to use with it.
Application environments like Carbon and
Cocoa use the key mapping and the key
char API as part of Carbon to actually
do the translation from that raw virtual
key code into the character code.
Modifier flags are set by posting
virtual key codes for the modifier keys.
All the keys on the keyboard
have these key codes.
You pass them into this interface and
it's just like you're pushing the keys
and letting them up on the keyboard.
Don't forget to release the
key after you've pressed it.
Event suppression,
when you post events into the system,
We turn off the hardware event
path for a little while by default.
That's to avoid mouse wars.
A student help desk system,
you want to drive a system for a
little by posting events into it.
You don't want the eight-year-old
grabbing his mouse and fighting you.
So we'll turn off the local
mouse for a short period of time.
The force-quit key combination
reconnects the local hardware
if things get really bad.
Say you goof when
you're debugging things.
You forget to let the mouse button up.
There are functions to
override the default behavior.
Now, I'd suggest you always
set the state as you want,
just in case the default
behavior changes in the future.
Event state combining
is one of these things.
That combines the flags from your
keyboard modifiers from the real keyboard
with the events from the remote system.
You might want to keep this off
to keep local modifier keys,
say the local shift key being held
down from getting into your events.
The most frequent question we get is,
how do we turn this off?
To do that,
you just want to set the suppression
interval to zero so it doesn't
suppress things for any length of time.
Tell the system, "Yeah,
I want event combining.
I want my local shift key and my
remote shift key to all act the same."
And you'll want to tell the system,
"Don't bother blocking
local hardware events.
Permit all events during the
suppression interval and permit all
local events during remote mouse drags.
Told you you had to let
that mouse button up.
If you leave that mouse button down,
you're doing a drag operation.
And this will normally block all
local events during that drag to keep
things from going horribly astray.
If you don't post that mouse up,
you're sticking in a drag state.
Bad.
Don't do that.
Common Developer Problems,
questions we run into.
"I want to filter all the
events in the system." Well,
you don't do that at the Quartz level.
That's the kind of thing
that goes deep in I/O Kit.
Or you might want to think
about what you're doing,
what is it you really need to accomplish?
For example,
some of the questions we've gotten on
this are operations that are better
handled as input managers in the
system than as generic low-level,
I filter every event and pick
out the ones I'm interested
in sort of operations.
Another little comment for people.
[Transcript missing]
: Documented interfaces may change.
They may go away.
They may stop working.
Undocumented parameters to
undocumented functions may do
undocumented things to the system.
You may let the smoke out of some parts.
The stuff in the public
headers is actually better.
When we do our development,
we often build things
first as a private SPI,
and then once we've figured
out all the quirks and have,
well, we've gotten our act together,
we turn it into a public interface.
Please use the public interfaces.
Who here is calling a private interface?
Any volunteers?
Ah, yes, yes.
I'll change that for you.
I'll take care of that one.
And for more information,
let's get Travis up here.
Thank you, Mike.
I think we have some reference
documentation available for you guys.
We're actually going to aggregate it.
It's all aggregated on sort of the
reorganized ADC website where TechPubs
has moved the documentation from
where it was before we began WWDC.
So everything should be, you know,
documentation should be appearing on a
lot of the stuff under the graphics and
imaging area on the revised ADC website.
We also have some tech
notes that are available.
So there's going to be Tech Note 207.
It talks about the CG Direct Display API.
And then, well, probably very many people
won't be going to 208,
the CG Direct Palette API,
considering how unpopular 8-bit palette
is actually becoming and should become.
We have some additional QAs,
such as many relating to
Quick Draw and how to use it if
I'm a Carbon Quick Draw app and
I need to use CG Direct Display.
You know,
several Q&As up here that are available.
And we have lots of sample code
that are going to be appearing.
I don't think all of
these are up quite yet,
but check the ADC website.
We plan to push a lot of the samples that
you saw in today's demo up very shortly.
And then obviously,
if you need more information on
how to use GL and GL Read Pixels,
you can look at a couple different
GL references at OpenGL.org,
which is a good resource
for OpenGL in general.